Ten years ago, I was very religious and living in Dallas. I worked in a religious organization and had also worked for a megachurch called Watermark. The vast majority of my friends were also Christians in Dallas. Then, I moved to New York. 
After a few years, I left the faith entirely. Right around that time was when Michael Brown was killed in Ferguson and the Black Lives Matter movement began to pick up steam. I was troubled in the ways that a few members of my former community talked about Black Lives Matter and the protesters. What bothered me more were the Christians who said nothing. 


In 2016, now no longer a believer, I moved back to Dallas briefly to go to a coding bootcamp. I lived with my parents and went downtown every morning  to code my heart out. While I was there, Alton Sterling and Philando Castille were killed by police. It was heartbreaking and I wanted to do something. The protest that was planned in Dallas was a couple of blocks away from my bootcamp and I wanted to attend but ultimately didn’t because no one would go with me. When I got home that night I found out about the shooting. Over the next few weeks I would see the bullet holes every morning on my walk to school. The wild thing that happened was my Christian friends response to the event. The people who had been quiet before actually started talking about Black Lives Matter in a positive light. I heard a lot about how pastors were responding and I was encouraged. I’ve wanted to do a deep dive ever since.
This semester when I started to do that, it was hard for me to imagine a story that wasn’t 100% driven by narrative. My early designs were scrolly-telling. I wanted to give as much context as possible and help the audience really make sense of any visualizations before you get to them. 

In working on the project, my first move was exploration. I started trying to find the various sermons from the Sunday after the shooting (July 10th). I would search the church’s website first, then YouTube and finally podcasts if I still hadn’t found anything. For sermons that didn’t have a transcript already, I put them through transcription software. Some of them aren’t perfect, but the text itself isn’t what matters so I made a value call to not painstakingly fix them. The only big fix I made was to make sure that the breaks from paragraph to paragraph fell in the right place. I had to listen to the sermon while reading through the transcript to do that. Then I formatted the sermon as an array  of strings. One string for each paragraph. 

For annotations, my initial plan was to track how many “Pro Black Lives Matter” and how many “Pro Police” things were said. That became untenable as a framework because the pastors were speaking too much in generalities to be able to clearly  demarcate between one and the other. Since Martin Luther King Jr’s  “Letter from Birmingham Jail” was in the back of my head a premise, I decided to break it down into what he asked of white people and white pastors.He asked for things that were much more specific like praising protestors instead of just police or asking black people to not try to change things too quickly. Those could much more easily map to specific paragraphs. 

Then, when I had everything actually built, it was just falling flat. The block of text was confusing and there wasn't that much else to go off of. That's when I realized I wanted to be able to show the influence of the various pastors and then developed the bubble charts. I also mounted the comparison charts and allowed them to be the navigation. It was clearer that there was a comparison that way. 

I have ideas for a future project on this subject. I would like to analyze the pastors’ comments on Black Lives Matter in all sermons from 2015 to 2020. How did they respond when the protests were happening in Ferguson? How did they respond after the white supremacist rally in Charlottesville? What about when George Floyd died? Or when Donald Trump won the presidency? What did they have to say?

The close reading that I needed for this project wouldn’t scale well, unfortunately. It would just be too labor intensive. I’ve considered doing topic modeling using LDA (similar to Eva’s project on Invisible Man).  There are very influential pastors all over the country.  I would also like to geographically broaden the scope since we would be looking at events that happened all over the country. You could even compare the pastors in Dallas to pastors in other parts of the country.  This would require a lot of money for proper transcription and formatting as well as the cooperation of the churches. Who knows? Maybe I can make it happen. 

Between my two classes this semester and this project in particular, I’ve gained an appreciation for curating data. Obviously, I love to code and enormous amounts of quantitative data can be fun, but I get much more enjoyment and satisfaction from going deep on a smaller dataset. Since being in this program, I have yet to do a data viz project on an already existing dataset and I have wondered if it made me less of a Serious Person. I rarely do math-heavy visualizations. I feel like this semester I gave myself permission to keep doing things that way and to chase the stories that I think are interesting. 
